Unstructured API Quickstart (#712)
Unstructured-IO/docs: api-reference/partition/quickstart.mdx

---
title: Unstructured API Quickstart
---

The following code shows how to use the [Unstructured Python SDK](/api-reference/partition/sdk-python) 
to have Unstructured process one or more local files by using 
the [Unstructured Partition Endpoint](/api-reference/partition/overview). 

To run this code, you will need the following:

- An Unstructured account and an Unstructured API key for your account. [Learn how](/api-reference/partition/overview#get-started).

> - Python installed on your local machine.

Author: ```suggestion
- Python 3.9 or higher installed on your local machine.
```

- You must install the Unstructured Python SDK on your local machine, for example by running one of the 
  following commands:

  - For `uv`, run `uv add unstructured-client`
  - For `venv` (or for no virtual environment), run `pip install unstructured-client`

- Add the following code to a Python file on your local machine; make the following code changes; and then run the code file to see the results.

  - Replace `<unstructured-api-key>` with your Unstructured API key. 
  - To process all files within a directory, change `None` for `input_dir` to a string that contains the path to the directory.
  - To process specific files within a directory or across multiple directories, change `None` for `input_file` to a string that contains 
    a comma-separated list of filepaths, for example `"./input/2507.13305v1.pdf,./input2/table-multi-row-column-cells.pdf"`. These filepaths 
    can be relative to the following code file, or absolute references.

    <Note>
        If `input_dir` and `input_file` are both set to something other than `None`, then the `input_dir` setting takes precedence, and the `input_file` setting is ignored.
    </Note>

>   - For the `output_dir` parameter, specify a string that contains the path to the directory that you want Unstructured to send its JSON output files. This code assumes 

Reviewer: Nit: the `os.makedirs` line in there will create the output dir if needed.

>   - For the `output_dir` parameter, specify a string that contains the path to the directory that you want Unstructured to send its JSON output files. If the specified directory does not exist at that location,  
>     the code will create the missing directory for you. You can change this to any relative or absolute
>     directory path.
> 
> ```python Python SDK

Author: ```suggestion
  - For the `output_dir` parameter, specify a string that contains the path to the directory that you want Unstructured to send its JSON output files. If the specified directory does not exist at that location,  
    the code will create the missing directory for you. You can change this to any relative or absolute
    directory path.
    
## Sample code

```python Python SDK
```

    filenames = []
    for root, _, files in os.walk(input_dir):
        for file in files:
            if not file.endswith('.json'):
                filenames.append(os.path.join(root, file))

    return filenames

async def process_files():
    # Initialize with either a directory name, to process everything in the dir,
    # or a comma-separated list of filepaths.
    input_dir = None   # "path/to/input/directory"
    input_files = None # "path/to/file,path/to/file,path/to/file"

    # Set to the directory for output json files. This dir 
    # will be created if needed.
    output_dir = "./output/"

    if input_dir:
        filenames = load_filenames_in_directory(input_dir)
    else:
        filenames = input_files.split(",")

    os.makedirs(output_dir, exist_ok=True)

    tasks = []
    for filename in filenames:
        tasks.append(
            process_file_and_save_result(filename, output_dir)
        )

    await asyncio.gather(*tasks)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(process_files())
```

## Next steps

This quickstart shows how to use the Unstructured Partition Endpoint, which is intended for rapid prototyping of 

> Unstructured's various [partitioning](/ui/partitioning) strategies, with limited support for [chunking](/ui/chunking). 

Author: ```suggestion
some of Unstructured's [partitioning](/api-reference/partition/partitioning) strategies, with limited support for [chunking](/api-reference/partition/chunking). 
```

It is designed to work only with processing of local files.

Take your code to the next level by switching over to the [Unstructured Workflow Endpoint](/api-reference/workflow/overview) 

> for production-level scenarios, file processing in batches, files and data in remote locations, full support for chunking, 

Author: ```suggestion
for production-level scenarios, file processing in batches, files and data in remote locations, full support for [chunking](/ui/chunking), 
```

> generating [embeddings](/ui/embeddings), applying post-transform [enrichments](/ui/enriching/overview), 

Author: ```suggestion
generating [embeddings](/ui/embedding), applying post-transform [enrichments](/ui/enriching/overview), 
```

the [Unstructured Partition Endpoint](/api-reference/partition/overview). 

To run this code, you will need the following:

- An Unstructured account and an Unstructured API key for your account. [Learn how](/api-reference/partition/overview#get-started).
- Python 3.9 or higher installed on your local machine.
- A Python virtual environment is recommended for isolating and versioning Python project code dependencies, but this is not required. 
  To create and activate a virtual environment, you can use a framework such as 
  [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) (recommended). Python provides a built-in framework named 
  [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).
- You must install the Unstructured Python SDK on your local machine, for example by running one of the 
  following commands:

  - For `uv`, run `uv add unstructured-client`
  - For `venv` (or for no virtual environment), run `pip install unstructured-client`

- Add the following code to a Python file on your local machine; make the following code changes; and then run the code file to see the results.

  - Replace `<unstructured-api-key>` with your Unstructured API key. 

>   - To process all files within a directory, change `None` for `input_dir` to a string that contains the path to the directory.

Author: ```suggestion
  - To process all files within a directory, change `None` for `input_dir` to a string that contains the path to the directory on your local machine. This can be a relative or absolute path.
```

>   - To process specific files within a directory or across multiple directories, change `None` for `input_file` to a string that contains 
>     a comma-separated list of filepaths, for example `"./input/2507.13305v1.pdf,./input2/table-multi-row-column-cells.pdf"`. These filepaths 
>     can be relative to the following code file, or absolute references.

Author: ```suggestion
  - To process specific files within a directory or across multiple directories, change `None` for `input_file` to a string that contains 
    a comma-separated list of filepaths on your local machine, for example `"./input/2507.13305v1.pdf,./input2/table-multi-row-column-cells.pdf"`. These filepaths 
    can be relative or absolute.
```

    <Note>
        If `input_dir` and `input_file` are both set to something other than `None`, then the `input_dir` setting takes precedence, and the `input_file` setting is ignored.
    </Note>

>   - For the `output_dir` parameter, specify a string that contains the path to the directory that you want Unstructured to send its JSON output files. If the specified directory does not exist at that location,  
>     the code will create the missing directory for you. You can change this to any relative or absolute
>     directory path.

Author: ```suggestion
  - For the `output_dir` parameter, specify a string that contains the path to the directory on your local machine that you want Unstructured to send its JSON output files. If the specified directory does not exist at that location,  the code will create the missing directory for you. You can change this to any relative or absolute
    directory path.
```
